Hello friends today, our topic is SRam 6T,
so we will see first the meaning of the circuit
then we will see the read and write operation
then further we will see some specification
design what we have to keep in the mind when
we have to design this SRAM 6T.
Let's go step by step.
Now the first point is circuit.
So let's understand this circuit first, we
will go from inside out then we will understand
from outside in first you have to understand
this.This is the memory part.
This whole part is the memory part.
So what we have done is we have connected
two inverters.
This is basically the structure we are connecting two inverters in this fashion. Now this is from the basic NOR Gate
we have change this to the CMOS inverters because the working
is same as CMOS inverter and nor gate
same we have connected this using CMOS inverter.
Now, this will act as memory.
How let's say we have one here.
Now, the inversion of 1 is 0 again 0 will
go and it would be inverted again.
So one now, you can note that this will act
as memory because this side will always be
1 and this side will always be 0 now the output
are taken as q and Q bar.
Now you can note that this q and Q Bar are
this outputs simple Now Memory part is clear.You
You can note that memory part is clear.
Now, we have to talk about this access transistor.Now,
you can note that this memory has to be connected
to something that we can read and we can write
if it is connected to some line then we can
read what is in the memory and we can write
into that see bit and bit bar will act as
that line now to access this lines.We use
the access transistor the word access used.All
right.
now you can see that the second
point is now if word line is 1 what will
happen if this is 1 means both this access
transistor are on this means that we can access
this bit and bit bar line if suppose it is
0 so in one read and write operation are possible
because this can be active.
But if it is 0 what will happen if this is
0 the access are lost.
So the memory will be in the whole state.
So the second Was word line significance if
it is one read and write is possible.
If it is 0 we are in the whole state.
Now.
The third question is if we are in the read
and write set how you will read and write
so the significance of bit and bit bar line
is here.
This will act as input line when we have to
write into the memory.
So this will act as input line when we have
to write into the memory if we have to read
from the memory.
This will act as the output lines.
So bit and bit bar is equal to input when
we have to write and we have to it will act
as output when we have to read from the memory.So
third point was between bit and bit bar these
are the pre charged capacitor will be used
pre charged capacitor will be used in read
and write operation.
So its significance in read and write operation.
Now, let's go from outside.
So pre charged capacitor used in read and
write bit and bit bar for input and output
access transistor to make sure that we can
use the input and output.Now, this is the
memory this are the output of the inverter
as you can see simplified version.
Now let's talk about the working of read and
write.The second point is read operation read
operation is very important.
See you have to note this point first when
we talk about real this means memory should
hold some value.
Let's say Q is 1 and Q Bar is the complement.
So if Q is 1 Q Bar will be 0 now.
You can note that Q is 1 Q Bar is 0 first
point second point we have to read as we have
to read we have to use this lines.
Now question is if we have to use this line
what we have to do we have to make this word
line as one so if word line is one this access
transistor will be on if these are on we can
use this right.
Now.
The third point is we are using this line.So
what we have to make sure that it is input
or output see memory has some value and we have
to read some value.So what will be this right?
This would be the output lines.
So we have to make sure bit and bit bar.
Are the output lines
Right?  third point is that now let's talk about
the 4 point means as I said this capacitor
has significance in read and write operation.
So this would be pre-charged.
So pre-charged means at this node.
The value of the voltage would be VDD similarly
at this node.
The value of voltage would be VDD So the pre
charge capacitors is the fourth point.Now
the fifth point is is there a voltage difference
you can see at here and add Q is equal to
1 there is no voltage difference.
So capacitor will not discharge.
Let's take here Q Bar is 0 the node voltages
here VDD Is there a voltage difference 0 & 1
yes, there is a voltage difference.
So capacitor will discharge now current will
flow and capacitor will discharge so this
node voltage will decrease so with bar.
Voltage will decrease so now six point is
fifth point is very important because this
will lead to the answer.
So here let's take a recap voltage here
VDD voltage here 0 voltage difference.
Yes current will flow.
Yes capacitor discharge and when capacitor
discharge voltage decreases at this node.
This means that bit power voltage decreases.
Now what we have to do we have to send this
values of bit and bit bar to this sense amplifier.
Now this sense amplifier will act as comparator.And
when comparator will say if bit BAR value
decreases,then the output should be if bit
BAR value decreases.
Then the output should be 1 right.
So if this will happen then we have successfully
you can see read from the memory because the
memory has the value 1 and we have successfully
read output is equal to one.
Now this is the read operation.
Now, let's take another example suppose Q
is 0 Q Bar is one now.
You have to think and say the answer what
will happen take some time.So if you have
pause this video and sort it then you will
note that second point will remain as it is
Word line is 1 this is also same bit and
bit bar will act as output because we have
to read from the memory fourth point is pre-charged
that will always happen right pre charged
capacitor.
Now fifth point is now we have to note that
Q Bar is 1 and this is VDD no voltage difference.No
current will flow when we talk about here.
You can see voltage is VDD, but Q is now 0
so What will happen voltage difference means
current will flow this means that capacitor
will discharge when capacitor discharge bit
voltage decreases.
So bit line voltage decreases.So bit voltage
decreases is the fifth point.
So that's why I have marked it important because
from here we will get the answer.
So six point Was Bit and bit Bar sent to
sense amplifier correct comparator.
It will check now it will check if bit voltage
decreases then the output is equal to 0.
So all depends on the comparator, right?
So if bit line voltage decreases the output
value is 0 so we have successfully read that
if memory has the value zero we have successfully
read that the output that is the value of
memory is equal to zero.